--- strona 2 ---

PRELIMINARY INFORMATION

The following study has been produced as part of the project 'Dialogue across
Cultures - A Model for Cross-Border Mediation in a Parental Abduction Situation' and
summarises the findings and recommendations of mediators and mediation participants
carried out during the testing phase of the Model, supplemented by good practices
proposed by intercultural mediation centres from the UK and Germany.
Educational videos in the areas of law, psychology, mediation and intercultural
communication, a training webinar and additional materials are an integral part of the
Model and this study - available in the project content.

GOALS OF CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL FAMILY MEDIATION

The overarching goal of cross-border family mediation, in a situation of parental
abduction or threat of parental abduction, is to restore a sense of psychological security
and to stabilise the life situation of the child and parents by regulating important issues
in the life of the family.
The mediator's role is also to enable the parties to mutually understand the cultural
differences that divide them as factors that hinder agreement on a parenting plan - the
mediator acts as an 'interpreter of life in another culture'. It is important to remember
that cross-cultural differences during mediation occur on two levels:
• between the parties to the mediation,
• between the parties to the mediation and the mediator.

Given the different understandings of the meaning and scope of the exercise of
parental authority, special care should be taken to define, commonalise and ascertain
the identical understanding of these meanings for both parties at the beginning of the
mediation process.

--- strona 3 ---

The above topics are discussed in more detail in the training webinar that was
developed as part of the project.

In the case of a parenting plan carried out at the crossroads of two cultures, in
addition to the issues that are standard goals in family mediation, the cross-border
mediator is obliged to pay attention to aspects that are often overlooked when
mediating in a culturally homogeneous process. In the case of international mediation,
however, these are of particular importance. These include:
• Establishing a uniform system of values transmitted to the child and the
upbringing rules applied, while respecting the respect and requirements of each
of the parents' cultures.
• Determining in which religion or philosophical system the child will be raised and
setting standards for their observance.
• Paying attention to building equivalent ties to the culture and country of origin
of the mother and father and, by extension, to the parents' extended family or
friends.
• Determining the extent and ways in which the child will be introduced to the
child's area of cultural heritage, e.g. history, culture and art, as well as secular and
religious traditions and customs that play an important role in the social life of
both parents.
• Determining whether the child will be guided and educated towards monolingual
or bilingualism, as well as which language will act as the first language and what
methods will be used to achieve this. This is a very important issue, as this choice
can be seen as defining the child's affiliation to the culture whose language is
spoken and thus determining which parent is 'more important'.
• The role in the child's life of other family members and how to contact them -
grandparents, aunts and uncles, cousins - who often live far away. It is important
here to establish a schedule of meetings or other forms of contact, taking into
account the dates of special days in the different countries in which the extended

--- strona 4 ---

family members live and the cultures to which they belong: e.g. Grandmother's
Day and Grandfather's Day, dates of important holidays, Children's Day, etc.
• Clarifying issues that may be a very important part of parenting in a given culture,
or a cultural taboo, e.g. having a pet, the child's diet, how to dress, etc.
• Arrangements related to the implementation of contact with the child, which
should be discussed in detail in terms of their feasibility. Consideration should be
given, among other things, to the long distances between the parents' homes,
the timing of important holidays that interfere, for example, with the school year
in another country, transport costs, lack of a good air connection, degree of
freedom to travel to the country in question - visa, residence permits, etc.

On the above issues, the mediator also acts as an advocate for the rights of the child
- this is particularly important in cultures where the child is given a low level of self-
determination and the right to express his or her own opinion or show emotions is
restricted.

The above topics are discussed in the videos that were produced as part of the
project:
• "Child adaptation in multicultural and multilingual settings" in the Psychology
section,
• "Intercultural coral reefs in the boundless waters of marriage" in the Intercultural
communication section.
• "Adaptation of the child in a multicultural and multilingual environment" in
Psychology,
• "Fundamentals of Intercultural Competence" in the Intercultural Communication
section,
• „Meeting of two worlds_the iceberg metaphor" in the Intercultural
Communication section,
• "The union of two cultures" in Intercultural Communication,

--- strona 5 ---

• "Intercultural coral reefs in the boundless waters of marriage" in Intercultural
Communication,
• and in the training webinar that was produced as part of the project.

PRINCIPLES OF CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL FAMILY MEDIATION

Conducting cross-cultural cross-border mediation requires special attention on the
part of the mediator to respect the basic principles of mediation: neutrality,
voluntariness, impartiality, confidentiality and acceptability, which means:

• Respecting the principle of voluntariness, the mediator ensures that the parties'
agreement or lack thereof to mediate is free from any pressure from the partner
and the partner's partner, their families, the so-called "head of family" and other
circles of influence. This applies to people coming from a strongly collectivist
culture, where the influence of the elderly on family matters is very clear and
often their voice is decisive.

During the mediation process, it is good practice, confirming agreement during one-
to-one meetings with each party, to provide a safe space for the possibility of
withdrawal.

• Respecting the principle of neutrality, the mediator ensures that he or she is self-
aware of his or her own values, norms, beliefs and biases and makes every effort
to ensure that these do not influence the mediation process. He informs the
parties that he has taken care to ensure neutrality in this area.

Maintaining the principle of neutrality when mediating with people representing
values and social norms that are at odds with the mediator's culture is one of the major
challenges of cross-cultural mediation.

--- strona 6 ---

The mediator acts without exerting pressure on the conflicting parties - this principle
should be particularly taken into account, as some cultures differ considerably in the
level and form of influence exerted on others. The formulation of statements that in one
culture are neutral and merely point to a possible solution, in another may be perceived
as an attempt to pressure a party.
Another element in the context of cultures differing in the degree of individual self-
determination - the mediator may more or less consciously influence one of the parties
by pointing out, for example, human rights in the mediator's culture or discussing the
different social roles of men and women. Such behaviour may also be perceived as a
form of pressure on the parties.

• Respecting the principle of confidentiality, the mediator should explain to the
parties in an understandable way what it consists of and warn them that any
attempt by the family to pressure them about the mediation process and
arrangements will be ineffective. Furthermore, the mediator should make sure
that this information is correctly received by the parties.

People from collectivist cultures have a huge problem trusting and understanding
that the mediation process remains only between them and the mediator. These people
have grown up in an environment where very personal issues are discussed among
family and friends. Such individuals may find it difficult to speak openly during
mediation, as they are concerned about revealing the mediation process and the
subsequent assessment of the environment. This issue may require additional
clarification from the mediator.
The principle of confidentiality is also related to the situation where one of the
parties does not wish to disclose his or her location and that of the child. In such a case,
it is particularly important for the mediator to ensure that no such disclosure takes place.

--- strona 7 ---

• Respecting the principle of impartiality, the mediator has the difficult role of
reconciling and respecting cultural differences. Furthermore, it informs that the
parties in mediation should be treated equally by the mediator with the principle
of satisfying the needs of the respective party that are conditioned by their
culture, e.g. maintaining the level of power distance and the resulting hierarchy,
or the role of women and men in a given society.

The mediator may unconsciously assume that the norms present in their culture - the
right to speak on one's own behalf - are universal and unconsciously exert pressure to
speak (e.g. in the Caucasus it is not uncommon for a woman to have to ask permission
to speak in a discussion). This can result in resistance and loss of confidence in the
mediation process. Knowing that the person does not have permission in his or her
culture to speak on his or her own behalf, the mediator should modify questioning
techniques so that the person feels comfortable.

Consideration should also be given to the question of the balance of power in
mediation. In classical models, it is assumed that the mediator's role is to balance the
power and influence of both parties in the process. If the mediator achieves this by
disregarding the cultural constraints of the parties, such a person may face social
consequences for his or her behaviour after the mediation. Ignorance of the norms
accepted in a given culture can contribute to such situations and ultimately work to the
disadvantage of the 'weaker' party. It is therefore extremely important not to
disadvantage the parties.

• Respecting the principle of acceptability, the mediator, as in the case of taking
consent to mediation, ensures that the expression of the parties' acceptance of
the mediation provisions is free from the influence of the partner/partner, family
and third parties. It is good practice to have this conversation during meetings in
private.

--- strona 8 ---

The different ways in which mediation is perceived and conducted in other countries
and the parties' knowledge and awareness of the different types of mediation is also an
important issue. In Austria mediation is a strictly defined formal procedure, in Poland
the mediator can use any type of mediation (e.g. transformative or therapeutic). For
example, individual meetings do not function in many countries. The mediator should
gather knowledge about the applicable rules in the parties' country of origin and warn
the parties about the planned mediation process and its type.
It is also the task of the cross-cultural mediator to make sure that the parties to the
mediation properly understand the provisions of the settlement agreement. Attention
should be paid to the parties' requirements for the level of detail in the settlement
provisions - in countries characterised by a high degree of uncertainty avoidance, the
settlement agreement should be very detailed. The context of the communication, the
semantics of the definition of terms, etc. should be kept in mind to avoid
misunderstandings.

The above topics are discussed in the videos that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The principle of neutrality in cross-border mediation" in the Mediation section,
• "Fundamentals of Intercultural Competence" in the Intercultural Communication
section,
• "Meeting of two worlds_the iceberg metaphor" in the Intercultural
Communication section,
• "The union of two cultures" in the Intercultural Communication section,
• and in the training webinar that was developed as part of the project.

--- strona 9 ---

INTERCULTURAL MEDIATOR COMPETENCES

In the context of intercultural mediation, the words of the Norwegian mediator,
Grethe Nordhelle, take on particular significance:
"A good mediator changes his methods depending on the situation he is confronted with."1

A mediator, in addition to the obvious formal qualifications, aptitude and character
traits recognised as necessary to undertake this role, should be characterised by
qualities such as honesty, thoroughness, kindness, responsibility, attentiveness,
openness towards other people, emotional stability, resistance to stress, etc. It is very
important that a cross-border family mediator in parental abduction cases continuously
develops his/her intercultural competence in three areas:

I.
Knowledge

• The mediator knows what his or her own cultural background, held stereotypes,
prejudices and beliefs about other peoples, ethnic and religious groups are. He is
well aware that these can have an impact on his mediation process with people
representing different cultures. He/she is aware of his/her own body language
and is able to adapt it to the situation at hand, especially when using mirroring
techniques.

• When entering the process, the mediator is aware of the values, social norms,
religions, customs and traditions of the culture from which the parties to the
mediation come, especially in the area of family and child-rearing. He acts with
respect for their parties, regardless of whether they declare attachment or
detachment from their own culture or religion.

• When entering the process, the mediator has knowledge of the family law in
force in the countries of origin or residence of the parties and knowledge of the

1 G. Nordhelle, Mekling. Konfliktrorstaelse og konflikthandtering”, GNF 2008.

--- strona 10 ---

international instruments governing the situation of abduction and parental
kidnapping.

• The mediator continuously improves his/her competences in the area of personal
development and extends his/her knowledge in the field of mediation methods
and techniques, intercultural communication, child and family psychology,
conflict prevention, conflict formation and resolution, national and international
law.

II.
Skills

• Listens to the party without judging, criticising, showing favour or otherwise
impressing his/her own opinions.

• Is able to show respect to people with different views, values, backgrounds
according to their social customs.

• Has the ability to self-reflect and can effectively reduce the influence of one's
own culture, beliefs, stereotypes and prejudices on the conduct of the mediation
process. In this respect, this is an extremely important element in maintaining the
mediator's principle of neutrality and impartiality.

• Uses a variety of communication techniques and conflict resolution methods and
tools, taking into account cultural factors, the needs of the parties in terms of
e.g. high or low context of speech, body language, level of social hierarchy etc.

• Is able to perceive differences in the definition of key concepts, the meaning and
understanding of which appear to be universal but are in fact subject to cultural
differences, e.g. family, marriage, responsibility for children, duties towards
parents, etc.

--- strona 11 ---

• Responds constructively to criticism of manifestations of one's own culture by
parties involved in mediation.

• Is able to use methods and techniques that minimise emotions - this is
particularly important when working with cultures that condone escalation of
emotions, especially in family matters.

• Builds an atmosphere of safety and trust by, among other things, understanding
and accepting the cultural specificities of the parties.

• Can respect the independence and autonomy of parties from cultures that deny
or restrict one party's right to self-determination.

III.
Attitude

• Mediates with respect for the rights and dignity of the human being regardless
of: gender, age, race, origin, nationality, ethnicity, religion, political views, health
status and other aspects.

• Is characterised by openness and cognitive curiosity to different models of family
and social life and flexibility in dealing with new and surprising situations.

• Shows tolerance for solutions that are not acceptable in the mediator's culture.

• Maintains mediator neutrality - understands and accepts different beliefs and
behaviours operating in other cultures.

• Demonstrates patience in the process of understanding the needs of parties
conditioned by a different culture.

--- strona 12 ---

The above themes are explored in the films that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The conflict wheel in cross-border mediation" in the Mediation section,
• "Cultural differences in the mediation process" in the Mediation section,
• "The principle of neutrality in cross-border mediation" in the Mediation section,
• "Cross-border mediation through the eyes of a mediator" in the Mediation
section,
• "Empathetic communication in mediation" in the Mediation section,
• "Migration and the Global Family" in the Intercultural Communication section,
• "Fundamentals of Intercultural Competence" in the Intercultural Communication
section,
• "Adaptation of the child in a multicultural and multilingual environment" in the
Psychology section.
• and in the training webinar that was developed as part of the project.

CONDUCTING CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL FAMILY MEDIATION

Awareness of the possibility to use mediation as an alternative dispute resolution
method varies from country to country. Due to different values and social norms in
different cultures, the parties may, for example, have a different perception of their right
to self-determination, to express their own opinion, of a child's right to have a say in
matters that concern them, or have a different approach to respecting the settlement
agreement. The mediator's role is to ensure that the parties recognise and have an
identical understanding of: the nature of the mediation process, the role of the mediator
and the implications of any settlement agreement.

Place of mediation
Due to the specificity of international mediation, where the parties are in other
countries or do not wish to disclose their place of residence or stay, there is a

--- strona 13 ---

requirement for a high degree of flexibility on the part of the mediator as to, inter alia,
the place of mediation, the method and means of communication used.
Thus, cross-border mediation, depending on the existing situation, the will of the parties
and the level of conflict between the parties, can be conducted:
• at a place indicated by the parties, where all participants in the mediation meet,
• at a place indicated by the parties, where meetings take place alternately with
the parties,
• in different locations (shuttle mediation), when the mediators travel between the
locations indicated by the parties and meet with them there as well,
• at a location roughly in the middle of the distance between the parties,
• online mediation where all participants meet on a chosen communication
platform,
• any mixed form, e.g. the mediators along with one party meet stationary and
connect via a communication platform with the other mediation participants.

For both onsite and online mediation, it is important to ensure a venue that meets
the requirements of parties from different cultures. Issues of privacy and neutrality or a
sense of security are very important, as these may be defined differently depending on
the culture.

It is also possible to contact a cross-border mediator residing in the other party's
place of residence and to conduct remote com- mediation with him or her. Such a
practice requires extensive contacts with cross-border mediators, e.g. within
professional networks. In this case, the meeting takes place online between the
mediator, the party, the interpreter and the other required professionals on one side and
the other side, the other mediator, the other interpreter and the other required
professionals.

--- strona 14 ---

Procedure
The mediator is responsible for maintaining the procedure and organisational issues
of the mediation. This is worth emphasising when mediating with parties from cultures
where there is a low need to follow established procedures and rules, in which case the
mediator's role is more demanding.

Important elements in the conduct of an intercultural mediation meeting
Particular cultural sensitivity should be maintained to avoid behaviour incompatible
with the social norms or traditions of the parties when:
• the creation and sending of mediation invitations - style of communication, level
of formality, forms of politeness,
• deciding which party the mediator contacts first at the mediation appointment
stage,
• the form of greeting - who greets whom, in what form and in what order,
• the order in which people enter the mediation room,
• the way chairs are set up for the mediation participants at the table,
• the type and manner of serving drinks and other refreshments,
• tone of voice, gesticulation and other body language appropriate to the situation,
• priority in giving the floor,
• involvement of third parties (professionals) during discussions,
• making sure that in case of meetings in private, a neutral third person will not be
necessary (especially when the party is a woman and the mediators are men).

For example, in Arab cultures, it is extremely important who speaks first in the
discussion, the order in which the parties enter the room and the impact of the spatial
relationship between the participants in the conversation - the arrangement of who sits
at the table and where.

--- strona 15 ---

Participation of mediators
Due to the nature of cross-cultural family mediation, the process should be
conducted by two mediators. It is important to bear in mind:
• The age of the mediators
Depending on the culture represented by the parties, the proper selection of
mediators by age is essential to preserve their authority and the parties' respect for the
mediators.
• Gender of the mediators
It is most desirable for mediators to be represented by a woman and a man. In some
cultures, such a proposal is not acceptable and a pair of mediators should be made up
of two men.

It is good practice for mediators to come from the parties' cultures of origin or to
have personal experience of contact with those cultures, e.g. having lived for a long time
in the communities concerned.

Individual meetings with participants
Having one-to-one meetings (either in-person or online) is extremely important in
cross-cultural mediation. It allows, in addition to providing and obtaining standard
information, to ascertain whether consent to mediation is voluntary and to obtain the
necessary information about the values, social norms characterising the mediating
party. It is also a good moment to clarify, in a way that is understandable to the party,
the rules of mediation, the role of mediators and the effects of mediation.

--- strona 16 ---

PARTICIPATION OF EXPERTS IN THE CROSS-BORDER FAMILY
MEDIATION PROCESS

Language interpreter
During the mediation process, the presence of a qualified interpreter is important in
order to:
• ensure good quality communication,
• prevent the parties from challenging the settlement agreement on the grounds
that the interpreter is not available or is not qualified in the language and
therefore does not understand the mediation process and its findings.

It is recommended that the interpreter also have knowledge of the parties' cultures of
origin in order to preserve the cultural context of the statements.

Dispensing with the presence of an interpreter, for fear of his or her disrupting the
process, is only possible if the mediator is fluent in the language of the parties.

All documents produced during the mediation process should be written in the parties'
native languages.

It is good practice to use a qualified interpreter who is familiar with the culture of the
interlocutor, especially in the context of customs concerning the establishment of new
relationships already at the stage of establishing contact with the parties, in order to
increase the likelihood of obtaining the parties' consent to mediation. In some cultures,
it is not acceptable for a stranger (here: the mediator) to contact directly for an invitation
to mediation, especially in a male-female configuration. The initiative for contact may
be through, for example, a family member or a person regarded as an authority in the
community.

--- strona 17 ---

The above themes are explored in the videos that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The role of the interpreter in cross-border mediation" in the Mediation section,
• „The role of the interpreter in the mediation proces” in the Mediation section.

Psychologist
Due to the high level of emotion involved in mediating the abduction or threat of
parental kidnapping of a child, it is recommended that a family psychologist with cross-
cultural competence be involved in the process. The psychologist should be familiar with
social norms regarding socially acceptable behaviour and reactions to difficult
situations, as well as values regarding children and family in the parties' cultures of
origin.
It is also important to consult the mental state of the parties to the mediation before
the process begins to ensure that the parties can participate in the mediation in a fully
informed manner. In the case of parental abductions, very often the mental state of the
parties prevents them from participating fully and consciously in the process.
In cultures, e.g. Scandinavian where the social norm is not to show emotion, sparse body
language and a subdued voice, the state of an emotionally unstable person may go
unnoticed. The reverse is true for expressive cultures, such as Italian or Cuban, in which
cases the mediating party may be mistaken for being emotionally unbalanced. In the
context of cultural differences, it should be noted that an action that signifies violence
in one community may be perceived differently in another culture as, for example, a
socially acceptable form of emotional expression.

The above topics were discussed in a video that was produced as part of a project:
• "Parents in Mediation. How to talk to a struggling couple' in the Psychology
section,
• "Parental abduction - the child's perspective" in the Psychology section,

--- strona 18 ---

• "The inner world of a child in a parental abduction situation" in the Psychology
section,
• and in the training webinar that was produced as part of the project.

Lawyers
The presence of lawyers during the mediation process disrupts the trust-building
process, runs the risk of formalising the meeting and of the parties treating the
mediation like part of a court hearing.
A cross-border mediator is obliged to be familiar with basic international law, but it
is difficult to require knowledge of the family law of the different countries.
Due to the different legal systems in which the parties to the mediation operate or the
language barrier, it is necessary to ensure that the parties have access to a lawyer before
the mediation starts, as it may be necessary to draw on the lawyer's expertise to reach
an agreement. A telephone consultation or consultation via a communication platform
is an acceptable option. In this way, doubts arising can be clarified efficiently and the
mediation process can continue unhindered.
It is recommended that all experts involved in the mediation process (lawyer,
family/child psychologist, interpreter and others) have knowledge in the area of cultural
differences and are familiar with the cultural specificities of the parties and understand
the motivations and context of the decisions made, in order to be able to reliably engage
in the mediation process.

CHILD AND FAMILY PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS IN OTHER COUNTRIES

Knowledge of the competences and methods of child and family protection
authorities in other countries is essential for the mediator to properly assess the
situation and to accurately predict possible intervention and its effects on the life of the
family by the aforementioned authorities. This is very important in order for the
mediator to have an objective assessment of both the possible support that a family

--- strona 19 ---

may receive in a conflict situation in a particular country and the actions that parents
perceive as a violation of their parental rights. The extent of the powers of child and
family protection offices in a country is a reflection of accepted attitudes, values and
social norms. In Norway and other Scandinavian countries, it is considered that the child
belongs to society as a whole and has a strong right to self-determination, and if the
family does not fulfil its functions the role of the state is to interfere deeply in the life
of the family in order to protect the right of the child. This attitude is often opposed in
countries where the child is seen as the 'property' of his or her parents and only they
have the right to decide on matters of importance in the child's life.

The above topics are discussed in the videos that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The Hague Convention and the European Arrest Warrant" in the Law section,
• "Prevention and mediation of the change of the child's country of residence" in
the Law section,
• "The role of the central authority in parental abduction cases" in the Law section,
• "Cross-border parental abductions - ITAKA Foundation" in the Law section,
• "Selected aspects of Polish family law" in the Law section,
• "Jugendamt in Germany" in the Law section,
• "Parental Abductions and Mediation in the UK Legal System" in the Law section,
• "The family mediation process in the UK" in the Law section.

COSTS OF CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL FAMILY MEDIATION

Cross-border family mediation generates many additional costs. It is important to
clarify the amount of the costs of the mediation process before the mediation starts and
to determine who bears them and in what proportion. Among other things, the
following should be taken into account: mediator's fees, lawyer's fees, psychologist's
fees, interpreter's fees, the cost of translating documents, the cost of renting a room or

--- strona 20 ---

paying for communication platforms, travel and other costs of all persons participating
in the mediation.

The mediator's fees and other mediation costs should be presented to the parties to
the mediation in a currency whose value is known to the parties.

Given the different customs regarding billing and payment of bills etc. in different
cultures, it is important to make sure that the manner of sharing and responsibility for
incurring payments is understood and acceptable to the parties. A common problem is
trying to haggle over the amount of fees or trying to move the conversation about
money to the end of the mediation. Settling before the mediation begins can be
perceived as a lack of trust or solvency by the parties - it is up to the mediator to clarify
this so that the parties' trust is not destroyed.
Particular care should be taken to ensure that the man's offer to bear the entire cost
is not tantamount to him 'hijacking' the mediation process, tantamount to an
expectation that the de facto mediation will be conducted to meet the needs and
expectations of the person bearing the cost of the mediation.

CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL MEDIATION SETTLEMENT

When constructing mediation agreements, knowledge of the family law of the
parties' countries of origin or residence and of international instruments governing
family matters is essential.
As a general rule, in matters of parental responsibility, the courts of the Member State
in which the child has his or her habitual residence at the time of filing the application
or petition have jurisdiction - (Article 7 of the Brussels II ter Regulation).
The notion of the child's habitual residence should always be interpreted with
reference to the specific case, on the basis of its facts.

--- strona 21 ---

It is advisable to draft the settlement according to one legal order and to apply for an
enforceability clause in the country where the provisions of the concluded settlement
will be implemented.

Two of the principles for the construction of mediation settlements are particularly
influenced by cultural differences.
• Principle: It is not contrary to the principles of comity
Here, there may be a discrepancy between the rules of social coexistence in the
culture of the court and the rules that apply in the culture of the party or parties to the
mediation. The mediator's role is to structure the settlement agreement in a way that
clarifies such discrepancies and their basis, and to secure the court's acceptance of the
provisions of the settlement agreement, e.g. the parents' duty of regular and engaging
care for grandparents or siblings. The mediator's knowledge and understanding of the
norms, customs and rules of social intercourse in the parties' countries of origin or
residence is essential here.
• Principle: It is not incomprehensible or contradictory
As explained above, it is essential here to be able to adequately frame and clarify
those points in the settlement agreement which, for a court coming from a different
cultural background, may be questionable.

The above topics are discussed in the video that was produced as part of the
project:
• "Selected aspects from Polish family law" in the Law section,
• and in a training webinar which was produced as part of the project.

--- strona 22 ---

INCLUSION OF THE CHILD OR THE CHILD'S VOICE

It is the mediator's responsibility to ensure that the proposal to involve the child in
the mediation or to include the child's voice is properly received by both parties both in
terms of intention, conduct, benefits and risks of doing so. This is especially true in
cultures where the child's voice is not taken into account in matters affecting the child
and all decisions are made authoritatively by the parents.
In cultures with a high power distance or strong collectivism, it is accepted that parents
decide on some aspects of their now adult children. In countries with low power
distance, e.g. Sweden, children at the age of 17/18 become independent, live separately
and have a high degree of autonomy in deciding their own affairs.

It is good practice to use specialised educational and psychological centres for the
inclusion of the child and the child's voice in the mediation process through certified
procedures. This ensures professional representation and psychological care for the
child in such a difficult situation and prevents possible complications.

The above topics were discussed in the films that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The voice of the child in mediation" in the Psychology section,
• "Adaptation of the child in a multicultural and multilingual environment" in the
Psychology section,
• „Child participation in the mediation proces” in the Mediation section.

--- strona 23 ---

THE ROLE OF TIME IN CROSS-BORDER INTERCULTURAL FAMILY
MEDIATION

Due to the nature of parental kidnapping, time plays a very important role, regardless
of whether the proceedings take place under the Hague Convention or not. The cross-
border mediator should take care to ensure that the mediation process can be carried
out quickly so as not to contribute to prolonging the procedures.

It is very beneficial in such a situation to maintain constant contact with available
comediators in Poland and abroad, translators, lawyers, psychologists and other persons
necessary for the rapid conduct of the international mediation process.

Since time is of the essence in situations where child abduction or kidnapping
mediation is being conducted, the suspicion that a party agrees to participate in
mediation simply because it is, for example, an element of a procedural tactic to prolong
the procedure, the mediator is obliged to notice this fact and dispel doubts or terminate
the mediation process.

REFUSAL OF A MEDIATOR TO CONDUCT CROSS-BORDER
INTERCULTURAL FAMILY MEDIATION

The Hague Convention and the rules of the mediator prohibit the use of mediation
where violence is present or makes the conduct of mediation subject to additional
conditions.

The above topics were discussed in the films that were produced as part of the
project:
• "The Hague Convention and the European Arrest Warrant" in the Law section.